uh hi uh thanks
for having me thanks james for
moderating uh this conversation
um last year we at steidasha happ's
festival invited david anika to
participate with a strange new hybrid
format they were working on together in
pandemic times that of the visual
assembly um
over and over the next months
i shared some of the weird lockdown with
david and with nikon we imagined what
this project would be like
the idea was to use structural
institutional visualization tools to
rethink
somehow even from the ground up
healthcare at the time when the crisis
in care was overwhelmingly clear
and this assembly which nika's was now
trying to carry out in madrid was
planned for october 11 and it didn't
happen for obvious reasons so instead
the festival helped to organize the
memorial carnival held on that day where
we were providing this constant video
stream
um that i was then overseeing and this
was a really intense experience and one
that this zoom maybe recaptures a little
bit the spirit of this is very much
like that and i'm really glad to be part
of it um
i guess
responding to what nika sent a little in
advance and thinking about you know
tools to fight against fascism today
one thing that i wanted to mention that
stuck in my mind while reading david's
work before i have ever had met him or
spoken to him um was came from the debt
book the book of debt as steve keane
just said
um the section in question is one about
communism um and graber point
david points out that much of our
thinking about communism is purely
mythical so this actually ties into
the mathematics uh point that david was
that steve was making
uh
i quote uh once upon a time uh humans
held all things in common in the garden
of eden during the golden age of saturn
in paleo paleolithic hunter-gatherer
bands then came the fall as the result
of which we are now cursed with
divisions of power and private property
the dream was that someday with the
advance of technology and general
prosperity with social revolutions
or the guidance of the party we would
finally be in a position to put things
back to restore common ownership and
common management of collective
resources
david points out that this is a story we
like to tell ourselves this is a myth
and that it's done already done enormous
damage not only an enormous amount of
good and you can only agree without even
launching into a critique of sorel or of
rosenberg or of the myths of the 20th
century worth dying for and so on
communism is not a fantastic failed epic
of ghosts and zombies ready ready to
rise from the thereafter instead he
argues in the book and i continue to
quote it's something that exists right
now something that exists to some degree
in any human society although there has
never been one in which anything uh has
been organized in that way and it would
be difficult to imagine how there could
be all of us act like communists a good
deal of the time none of that us as act
like communists consistent
so he calls this actually a a kind of
base rock a baseline communism a bedrock
of actually existing communism that's
the foundation for all human sociability
um
one
always behaves he writes in a spirit of
solidarity though this then this is the
problem more with some people than
others
and this means in turn that groups
define themselves by commonly held
property and sharing within the group
and that conflicts between groups or
hostility to strangers and departures
from this baseline ruptures in actually
something that's maybe even an eternal
and unquestioned basic morality so when
hospitality becomes hostility
that's when this rupture occurs he
remarks somewhere in that section noting
very finely noting the etymological
connection between the two words i was
really impressed i remember when i read
this because i thought this is wow this
is really like marx and species being
of humanity and you know you can really
understand that actually communism is
not something fantastic or utopian it's
here in the here and now and it's here
that it's something that can be grasped
especially he notes in that section in
moments of tragedy catastrophe or grief
this is when strangers suddenly become
sisters and brothers pulling together
somehow to make to to make life continue
i don't want to say that only
emergencies can prompt solidarity
quite on the contrary what made david's
loss so irreplaceable is really that he
was one of the few people on the left
today who
saw that baseline all the time in every
situation at least that was my feeling
from reading him had he lived i'm
convinced that he would have further
tapped into the extraordinary potential
of associate of a sociology describing
everyday communism that's potential in
our lives so thanks for having me and
i'm sorry if this has gone on too